From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this [music] is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> In the contentious fight over how to
address climate change in the United
States,
>> [music]
>> recycled lead is a feel-good story. It
can be processed with techniques that
keep workers safe and [music] reused in
batteries that power millions of
vehicles around the world.
But a New Times investigation [music]
reveals how this environmental
initiative comes at a major human cost.
Today, [music]
Peter Goodman explains the dirty
business of a supposedly clean [music]
technology.
>> [music]
>> It's Tuesday, December 2nd.
Peter, welcome to the show. Thanks for
having me.
You are one of our foremost experts on
the global economy and you just came out
with this really eye-opening
investigation on recycled batteries and
lead poisoning, which I will bet is not
something that most people know a lot
about. So, I'm very curious to know two
things. One, how did you even get on
this investigation? And number two, how
much did you, Peter, know about recycled
batteries when you first started?
>> I knew zero about recycled batteries and
that's that's that's rounding up.
>> Okay. [laughter]
>> Um [clears throat] so, I got a call from
my guy at The Examination, which is this
relatively new independent investigative
newsroom that specializes in global
public health. And they had this really
terrific reporter, a guy I'd never met,
though I'd heard about him, Will
Fitzgibbon. He had done a fair bit of
work already in Africa. He he was a lead
expert. He dug into the lead recycling
industry. And and this is the industry
that supplies a lot of the car batteries
that we find under the hoods of cars in
the US. We're talking new cars, used
cars at places like AutoZone, Home
Depot, Walmart. And a lot of the lead
that we're using to make car batteries
in the US is coming from outside of the
US because we've run out of supply
domestically. So, the industry's gone
out looking around the world for new
sources of lead and one of the places
it's now looking quite aggressively is
Nigeria.
>> [snorts]
>> Will had already spent a fair bit of
time looking into what this business
actually looks like on the ground. He'd
already figured out that the process of
recycling lead was being done in a way
that was really quite horrific to see up
close. It was really harmful to people.
And he'd had this terrific idea, which
was that, you know, we would actually go
and test people. We would find people
willing to volunteer for blood tests and
quantify just exactly how much lead was
reaching people's bloodstreams and we'd
also test soil to look into the tainting
of the food supply. And so, I got
enlisted to try to take a run at
figuring out who was buying it, how the
terms of trade were going down, all the
logistics along the way. They wanted me
because I've been writing versions of
complex supply chain stories now for 25
plus years around the world and I didn't
know anything about this particular
industry, but I did have some inkling
about shipping, logistics, and I was
certainly intrigued to try to make the
connection between this public health
catastrophe in West Africa and the auto
industry in the United States.
That connection sounds incredibly
challenging to make. Yeah, it's it's
enormously challenging, especially
because we're talking about a trade
that's secret. I mean, the participants
have no interest in talking to anybody
about this stuff. There's limited
publicly available data. And so, I found
myself taking on what quite honestly was
the most difficult reporting assignment
of my career. Where did you actually
start the reporting journey?
So, Will had already done a lot of this
legwork. He already had sources in
Nigeria. He understood where these
factories were. And then I went there
with Will to nail down the real-life
consequences for the people living in
villages right next to these plants and
also to go talk to people in Lagos who
could tell us about the Nigeria supply
chain part of it before this lead gets
put into shipping containers and sent
across the water for ports around the
world. So, where exactly did you go and
what did you see there? So, I went to a
place called Ogiejo, which is just north
of Lagos, which is a sprawling, you
know, enormous uh metropolitan area. And
Ogiejo is sort of a combination of an
industrial and rural where there are a
bunch of smelters, including the one
that we wound up focusing on called True
Metals. And we picked it not only
because it's really bad in terms of the
pollution that it puts out, but also
because it only deals in lead. And these
are
large factories where people are feeding
this lead into these giant furnaces that
send smoke wafting throughout the area,
including these villages that are right
next to the factories. So, I spent a lot
of time just sitting with families,
talking to them about the struggle of
living next door to these plants. People
were coughing, people were complaining
of all sorts of ailments that are linked
in the literature to lead poisoning, you
know, indigestion and various
gastrointestinal distress, unrelenting
headaches. And I saw children in schools
that were literally next to these
factories. So, I I was just blown away
and really horrified by what I was
seeing up close and it gave me a real
sense of the story's really important.
So, what you're seeing in this town is
all these signs of pollution that is
coming from this lead battery recycling
process. Before we get any further in
the story, I just want to have you
explain how and why a battery gets
recycled
the correct way and then what you saw in
Nigeria and how that was different.
>> Sure. So, you know, it's important to
note that virtually every car on the
road has a lead battery under there
somewhere, even electric vehicles. And
if we didn't have lead batteries, we'd
notice real fast. And it happens to be
one of the most recyclable elements on
Earth and the auto industry has really
leaned into that in promoting itself as
the exemplar of the circular economy.
They do recycle most of these old
batteries and have very sophisticated
plants that recycle. [clears throat]
They have, you know, automated processes
that break apart the old batteries and
extract the lead safely. They dispose of
the acid that's in there. They have
emissions controls that prevent lead
dust and smoke from spewing out into
communities. All that stuff costs
millions of dollars. And so, as
regulations have gotten stricter in
places like the United States, we've had
smelters move. And so, that's eliminated
local supply. At the same time, demand
has increased because population's
growing. We got more people driving
around in cars. And so, battery
manufacturers have had to go around the
world to go find more lead. And what I
saw in Nigeria was something very
different than what you would see if you
managed to get invited into a lead
recycling plant in North America.
I saw, first of all, people in so-called
breaking yards. These are the places
where they get the spent batteries.
They're brought by these people known as
pickers who come in by
rickshaw, bicycle, motorbike,
truck and they bring these old batteries
into these yards. And then men, often
shirtless with no protective gear
whatsoever,
use machetes to break apart the plastic
cases.
>> Just hammering at them.
>> Yeah.
>> And this is what would have been done by
machines in the United States in a
tightly controlled environment.
>> Correct.
>> This sounds incredibly dangerous.
Incredibly dangerous. You can just sense
it. Like you don't need some sort of PhD
in environmental science to understand
that it's not a good idea to have no
safety goggles,
have no gloves, to not have a shirt on,
be taking a machete, slamming it into an
old battery with acid spewing out in
every direction. Uh the smaller
operations, they take the acid and they
actually dump it into waterways. It's
just horrifying. Right? So, that's just
the battery breaking operations.
Then there's the furnaces.
This is where most of the pollution
comes from. And the furnaces are these
giant facilities that take the old lead
taken out of spent batteries and they
melt it down. They cook it at incredibly
high temperatures [music] into this
molten liquid that's poured into molds
that then form these ingots that can
then be, you know, moved around, trucked
to battery manufacturers that make new
batteries. And if you saw a plant, a
furnace in the US, you'd see equipment
[music] used to vacuum up dust. You'd
see machinery that prevents smoke from
getting out into the communities. You'd
see all sorts of automated systems to
prevent workers from poisoning
themselves by touching things with their
bare hands.
>> [music]
>> What I saw in Nigeria was just open air.
I mean, you could see the smoke with
your bare eyes just getting out between
the sheets of corrugated metal that are
the roofs of these factories. You could
smell it. I was invited into people's
homes. I talked to a a man who said,
"Yeah, my walls are black." And you
could see it. Just the smoke is so
intense. And the impacts of this are
just so obvious and so palpable that it
was impossible to not be moved by this.
So, it sounds like these places are
operating with very little regulation.
How did you end up tracing what happens
to the lead that they produce?
Well, we had trade data. You know, Will
at the examination built a terrific
database that had all the publicly
available information. So, typically a
trading company will identify sources of
recycled lead around the world. They'll
buy it. They'll ship it to an endpoint
in the United States, typically the Port
of Baltimore.
And then the story ended. So, my job was
to figure out, well, then what happens?
So, how did you do that? So, I quickly
figured out there's no expert to call.
There's nobody who did a dissertation on
this. There's no book. There's no
YouTube documentaries to watch for tips.
There isn't even, you know, Reddit to go
get dubious, you know, tips. I I was
>> Reddit for everything. Yeah, it was just
a black box. And I started to reach out
to people who worked for these trading
companies. The one I was most focused on
was this company called Trafigura.
>> And to be clear, Trafigura is basically
a middleman here. Correct. Yeah,
Trafigura's job is to buy and sell
commodities. They're the ones where most
expert in what's available, what's the
price. And so, I we had transactions we
could see in the database where
Trafigura is buying lead from these
smelters we're focusing on in Nigeria
and shipping it to the Port of
Baltimore. But I had no idea who was
buying it at that point. And so, I did a
bunch of different things. I signed up
to go to trade shows hoping I would run
into people who would help tell me the
story. I spent a lot of time on LinkedIn
just mass messaging anybody who had
worked at Trafigura. And that was pretty
lonely and felt fairly futile. Most
people ignored me. Some sent me to the
communications people who then ignored
me. Um and then eventually a handful of
people started helping me in a really
critical way. And they started to name
the same likely purchaser over and over
again. They named East Penn. Which is
the second largest battery manufacturer
in the United States. It's this
family-owned business. They're not
publicly traded. They're very quiet and
and they don't like to deal with the
press and they certainly didn't want to
deal with me. So, at this point I know,
and I put that in quotation marks. Like
I know on deep background, right? With
no names attached and no documents that
East Penn is buying lead from trading
companies that are bringing it into the
Port of Baltimore. But I can't prove it.
>> report it yet. You You have You have
good reporting, but it's not reportable
yet. It's not It's certainly not going
to be a satisfying significant part of
the story based on that sourcing. I
needed something stronger. So, I went to
the Port of Baltimore. Actually spent a
whole day there with a really excellent
photographer who had probably the most
unexciting day of her life. It was kind
of a fairly futile day. We actually
chartered a little fishing boat and we
just like tooled around the harbor in
Baltimore. And we were able to see the
dock where some of these shipments come
in. We saw a trucking yard where they
unloaded from the water. And we got a
sense of the geography, but there was no
vessel bringing in lead on this
particular day. But I did learn
something. And because of that
reporting, because of what I learned at
the truck yard, I reached out to this
logistics company where a guy who ran
the yard did very reluctantly and
somewhat elliptically confirm that they
handled lead incoming from West Africa
purchased by Trafigura and they sent
some of it out to Pennsylvania to East
Penn.
But we still really needed to talk to
East Penn about all this. Because, you
know, let's remember, this is the second
largest battery manufacturer in the
United States. It's not a household
name. It's not a company most of us ever
think about. But it's there and we're
participants. They're making batteries
under the hoods of millions of cars that
are out there on the road. They're the
ones actually profiting off of this and
depending upon the supply in Nigeria.
So, I wanted to understand what sorts of
due diligence they were undertaking to
ensure that this lead they were buying
from Nigeria was in compliance with
their social and environmental
standards.
>> [music]
>> So, I'd had calls out to East Penn and
they were just blowing me off. They
weren't responding to my calls. I wasn't
getting responses to my emails. [music]
Just no response. And it became clear to
me that I was going to have to figure
out how to confront East Penn.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Peter, I spent many years as a reporter,
so I can absolutely relate to this idea
that you have questions, you have to get
in front of the people you're writing
about, give them an opportunity to
respond. And you are getting nowhere
trying to go in through the front door,
which is what sounds like it was
happening to you with East Penn. So,
I imagine you had to get creative about
how to actually give them an opportunity
to comment.
>> to make a spectacle of myself.
>> [laughter]
>> Excellent.
>> how it happened. So, the big break was
in San Antonio where the Battery Council
International has this gathering. It's
this big, you know, golf resort and
there are people from battery companies
and lead recycling and, you know,
companies that make equipment used and
and they're all golfing and drinking and
dining and having a good time. And the
second I identify what story I'm working
on, they either don't know anything
about it because most most people when I
would tell them the story that Nigeria,
no way. We're not buying lead from
Nigeria. That's just not even possible.
How could they even have lead? Wow.
Okay, they didn't even know.
>> And and then the handful of people who
did know are like, "The last thing I
want to do is talk about the subject
with someone from the New York Times."
And I figured out that the head of East
Penn, the then CEO of East Penn, this
guy Chris Perritt, is getting this
distinguished service award from the
Battery Council International and I'm
planning to go.
>> Mhm. Cuz it's going to be my only shot.
At this point I've got calls out to
their various marketing people. I've
just got nowhere. So, I know Chris
Perritt's there. I really want to talk
to him. The communications guy says,
"This is supposed to be honoring him.
And if you're there asking these
uncomfortable questions, that'll really
be awkward." Now, the reporter in me is
like, "Well, I I I don't really care.
>> Mhm.
>> I work for the reader. I have to go ask
these questions." But I thought, well,
if I'm not going to get anywhere anyway
and I'm just going to make a spectacle
of myself, there's no upside to that.
>> You won't ambush him. I won't ambush
him. But out of that I'll get some basis
for a more productive engagement and
maybe go visit him in Pennsylvania. I do
finally hear from an outside PR firm for
East Penn. And I start to engage with
them. Eventually, I was able to persuade
Chris Perritt and other executives at
East Penn to talk to us.
And what did he actually say to you?
Well, he said that our reporting had
caused him to do a lot more thinking
than he'd previously done about the
origins of the lead and that previously
he he had talked to trading companies
like Trafigura and had said, you know, I
need this particular purity. And oh, by
the way, of course you're guaranteeing
that this is not causing social or
environmental problems. "Oh, no, of
course not." The trading company would
say, "You know, we have audit processes.
You know, all this is good." "Okay,
then. Just as long as you can deliver
the quantity and the purity that we need
at the guaranteed price, all good." And
since our reporting, he'd actually dug
into his own supply chain. Had become
concerned about the process of due
diligence the trading companies were
doing. And as he put it, you know, out
of the utmost of caution, decided that
he didn't want to buy any more lead from
Nigeria. So, I did ask him at one point
about moral culpability. And I said,
"Well, you know, given that we now know
that Trafigura's due diligence leaves a
lot to be desired and we could see with
our own eyes and what was playing out
villages [clears throat] next to these
smelters. Where do you fit in in in
terms of the moral culpability for
this?" And he said
he said, "Look, you know, was I too
trusting? I'll take that shot." What did
you make of that?
I thought that summed up the reality of
complicated supply chains. There's so
much sort of
plausible deniability built in that any
given participant can say plausibly,
"Oh, I thought somebody else was looking
out." Well, to that point though, this
is East Penn acknowledging that what's
happening on the ground is not okay,
right? Like it's not up to their
standards as an American company. Right.
But what about Trafigura? Like have they
made any kind of pledge to change or
modify their behavior? So, Trafigura
gave us this kind of general statement.
>> Mhm. But they say that they have an
audit process that ensures that they're
complying with their official social and
environmental standards. And we actually
talked to a consultant who does the
audits for Trafigura in Lagos, who
pushed back on the idea that it's just
like performative, superficial. He He
said, "I I really go and I look." First
question I had is, "Okay, do you go to
the battery breaking
yards?" "No. No, I just go to the
smelter." Okay, so right right off the
bat, you don't know anything about the
raw materials that are coming in or the
impacts for the people who are working
in these places or where the acid's
going, is it going in the stream, you
know, none of that, right? So then even
at the smelter, I said, "Well, what do
you What do you do?" He said, "Well, I I
look very, you know, carefully." But
the consultant said,
"I give them a real list of problems
that I identify, but the way this goes,
and I and I confirmed this with people
who've worked at Trafigura, is the
auditor will say, 'Okay, you know, it
really would be good if you handed out
safety goggles on a regular basis. It
really would be good if you put in a
system to control the lead dust. It
would be great if you put in battery
breaking equipment.' And the smelter
will say, 'Okay, thank you very much for
your suggestion. We will certainly hand
out safety goggles.'" And then Trafigura
says, "Great, your audit's done. Now
let's talk about the volume of the next
deal." I mean, this is not a process
that can end up in derailing a deal.
This is a process that is informed by a
desire to reach a conclusion at which
the deal carries on. And that's
[clears throat] the problem. So there is
due diligence, there are inspections.
>> There are recommendations.
>> There are recommendations, there's an
action plan, but there's no compulsion
to do the right thing or the business
doesn't happen. And meanwhile, the
person who's buying it on the other side
of the ocean, in this case Chris Pruitt
and East Penn, doesn't know any of that
and is certainly not getting on a plane
to go to Nigeria to make sure Trafigura
is really engaging in a rigorous audit
process.
So at this point, it sounds like you
know the answer to the part of the
investigation that you were responsible
for from that initial phone call you got
about this partnership.
>> Right. What about the other question?
The question about what kind of medical
harm was being caused to the people in
these towns in Nigeria by this lead
poisoning? So this is where the
examination did an extraordinary amount
of legwork. So Will had commissioned
this team of independent scientists in
Nigeria who found 70 volunteers. And
we're talking about 14 children, 16
people who worked at these lead
smelters. And these are people who live
very close to these smelters. You know,
imagine a village and in the very center
of the village, you know, churches right
up against the walls of these factories,
schools right up against the walls of
these factories. So life is playing out
all around. And we tested 70 people,
volunteers, right in the vicinity, and
roughly seven out of 10 of them had
levels of lead in their blood deemed
dangerous by various medical
authorities. Wow. So one of the things
that we were focused on was this
comparison with the worst lead disaster
at a battery manufacturer in Southern
California more than a decade ago, which
was a federal emergency. I mean, the
feds went in, they shut the place down,
they tested people, they took over,
they're still managing this. And there
was a soil test conducted at a preschool
there that found 95 parts per million
lead. Let me give you that number again.
95 parts per million. We tested a school
in Ogijo where we found 1,900
parts per million.
>> My god. Yeah. At that level of
contamination, what kind of health
effects would you expect immediately?
Well, first of all, you're talking about
irreversible brain damage, especially
for children. You're talking about
respiratory problems, relentless
headaches, exhaustion, just a lack of
functioning. And that's the lead, right?
And then there's just the reality if
you're living in a place where there's
smoke and terrible fumes all the time,
and there people are coughing.
It's just a living nightmare. So what
happened after you did all this testing?
After we did the testing, our research
partner shared some of this data with
the Nigerian government, the
environmental authorities. And within,
you know, just a few days, the five
worst smelters in Ogijo were shut down.
The heads of these companies were
summoned up to Abuja, the capital of
Nigeria, to have a conversation around
how they could supposedly make some
improvements, and then they were given
permission to restart. So it sounds like
the Nigerian government took pretty
swift action.
>> Well, [clears throat]
you know, it's complicated. So the
Nigerian government has been receiving
reports of these health problems going
back at least to 2018. And they got what
they described to me as promises to make
all of these improvements at these
plants, but when somebody showed me a
copy of the actual protocol that these
factories had to sign, this supposedly
enforceable document, it didn't have any
of the details of these promises that
they claim they got. And it specifically
had a two to three-year timeline for a
very vague promise to improve technology
at the plants. Mhm. So it seems pretty
clear that whatever
was said in the room with the heads of
these smelters, there is no enforceable
document that compels these companies to
do anything differently anytime soon.
And when I was back on the ground
talking to workers at these smelters,
what they said is, "Oh, yeah, now
they're giving us
uh safety goggles. They didn't used to
do that. Oh, they used to give us gloves
once a week, now they're giving them to
us twice a week." And presumably, it's
fair to say that the Nigerian government
knows that it probably should be doing a
lot more than just handing out gloves
and goggles if it wants to protect
people, given the high levels of lead
that is showing up in these test
results, right? I mean, what has to
happen at these plants
is they have to put in serious emission
controls, and it's going to cost
millions of dollars. If they put in
battery breaking equipment, that's going
to cost millions of dollars. This is not
something that's going to be fixed with
a bunch of gloves and goggles.
I do just wonder though, given your
experience covering global supply
chains, knowing what the incentives are
for the various actors here, knowing how
hard it is to reform an entire industry,
how confident are you that in five years
or 10 years or however long, somebody
will be able to purchase a car in the
United States and feel confident that
the battery in that car was made in a
safe and humane way?
I think there are serious reasons to
doubt that that positive outcome will
happen for the simple reason that the
incentives that created this situation
that we've been reporting on have not
changed. And those incentives are you
have large brands like East Penn that
actually make lots of batteries under
other brands. So it's not as if, you
know, a consumer can go off to the to
the battery store and say, "Don't give
me one of those East Penn batteries."
>> Right.
>> There are lots of others that they make
for other brands. We also know that
Nigeria is hardly alone as being a
country where there are large numbers of
people who are desperate enough just to
figure out how to get dinner on the
table tonight that they will accept
horrific pollution. I mean not that the
people in the communities want the
pollution, they're horrified by the
pollution, but in terms of the situation
for the policy makers, for the
environmental regulators, they would
like the plants cleaned up, but they're
also cognizant that if they push too
hard, this industry will shift
That's That's how this business tends to
go. I mean, my history of looking at
supply chain cases now going back
decades is that, you know, when you get
a public revelation, when you find out
that, say, fashion brand learns that
they've been relying on a supplier
that's been playing so dangerously that
people have died in a fire or in the
collapse of a building or rivers or or
drinking water is being poisoned, I
mean, what tends to happen is the supply
chain gets even more complex. Pieces
shift somewhere else, companies change
their names. Under the guise of safety,
perhaps, right? Like there's consumer
pressure, and then they say, "We're
going to make these reforms." And then
it the end result is what you're talking
about. Correct. Let's just say for the
sake of argument though that in this
case, in terms of battery recycling,
that every player involved wants to do
this the right way. They want to make a
safe battery and make it in an
environmentally friendly way.
What would the increase in cost of that
battery to the end buyer actually look
like? Well, it's a hypothetical. It's
one that we wrestled with in reporting
this story, and we concluded that
there's no satisfying answer because no
battery is going to be made exclusively
with lead from one country or another.
It all basically ends up getting blended
together. But the best we could figure
out is you're talking about, you know,
pennies on the dollar, assuming that
every participant in the chain passes on
their extra costs to the to the next
player, you're talking about a
single-digit dollar number to the
consumer at the end of the day in the
US. That's our best guess. There's a lot
of assumptions into that, but certainly
not a large amount of money. And I think
that it's fair to say that the verdict
[music]
of the global marketplace on the
question of what's it worth to poison
entire villages in Nigeria
>> [music]
>> is not that much.
Peter, thank you so [music] much. Thanks
so much for having me, Rachel.
>> [music]
>> In the days following publication of the
joint Times investigation, Nigerian
officials once again closed down several
smelters in the Ogijo region.
Officials also promised new
investigations from the federal
government and said they would conduct
additional blood testing of local
residents.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday,
>> [music]
>> Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy
met for hours with French President
Emmanuel Macron in Paris.
The meeting was part of a blitz to shore
up support from [music] European allies
in the midst of negotiations over a
US-led plan to end the war with Russia.
>> [music]
>> While Macron reiterated Europe's
commitment to Ukraine, the United States
has put increasing pressure on Zelenskyy
to agree to a deal
even as Russia has signaled its
opposition [music] to some of the plan's
proposals.
And the Transportation Security
Administration announced [music] that
beginning February 1st, travelers
without a Real ID compliant form of
identification will have to pay a $45
fee to fly.
>> [music]
>> Passengers can pre-pay the fee up to 10
days before they come to the airport.
Many travelers have already begun flying
with passports [music] and other
documents considered compliant with the
program. The TSA did not immediately
reveal how to [music] pay the new fee
and other details about the program.
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Winn, [music] Anna Foley, and Rochelle
Banja.
It was edited by Chris Hackel and
Michael Benoît.
Contains music by Dan Powell and was
engineered by Alyssa [music] Moxley.
Special thanks to Will Fitzgibbon and
Finbarr O'Reilly.
That's it for the daily. [music] I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.